---
layout: post
title: Lakeland 200 and Lessons Learned
date: 2023-04-19 17:48
category: 
author: Pete Aylward
image: 
tags: []
summary: A write up of an ITT around the Lakeland 200 
---

There's only 6 weeks to go before the <a href="https://highlandtrail550.weebly.com">HT550</a> which is my big event this year—perhaps my big event of any year—and while I've been putting in plenty of endurance-paced training rides haven't really tested myself by riding that much terrain of similar style to what I understand that to be. I thought about riding the Dales Divide group start again this year, but decided instead to tackle the Lakeland 200. The end result wasn't entirely pretty but with hindsight I can only see my experience doing it as a positive thing and one that will hopefully stand my in good stead for bigger things.

I'd been a little casual in my planning to ride the Lakeland 200, with a vague thought of doing it just some weekend sometime around Easter, perhaps with a <a href="https://www.kendal.cc">Kendal CC</a> club mate who'd expressed an interest in doing it too. He turned out to be off skiing for the month, so my ride became a self-supported ITT attempt. No bad thing, as HT550's the same. I knew that a 40 hours completion time was deemed a 'finish' and also that the FKT was a ridiculous sub 17 hours, so felt somewhere around 30 hours would be required to complete, so setting off of a Sunday morning would have me finish Monday lunchtime. I then saw the wonderful <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tYphY7XfEIo">Steezy Collective Lakeland 200 Project movie</a> and had a bit of a rethink: They looked to be really gunning for it, and are far more experienced in predomindantly off-road endurance events and came in around that 30 hour mark too. Perhaps 36 hours was a more reasonable aim. With that I decided to set off at sunrise on the Sunday. 

I've been gradually getting a bike and kit ready for HT550: A Cotic Cascade which has replaced my Bombtrack Hook EXT as my 'northern gravel' bike, and in preparation for what lies ahead, I've switched the rigid forks out for some 100mm travel ones, fitted wider bars, added a bigger cassette and smaller chain ring, and also knocked up a couple of custom bags to fit the smaller front triangle. 

I got to Staveley about 6am, parked the van, unloaded the bike and headed off as soon as my GPS had booted up and the route was visible. The morning's riding was all on trails I'd ridden before and things ticked along nicely what becoming a overcast but bright day in the Southern Lakes, but then descending towards Loughrigg Tarn I clipped a rock fairly hard with my rear wheel. I felt that horrible rock on rim thud, but thought I'd got away with it until I got onto the road section towards Little Langdale and realised the tyre was really quite soft. I gave it a good pump and carried on towards Tilberthwaite but within a few hundred meters it had lost enough pressure to feel every rock and root through the rim. I repeated this a few times before I looked again and could see a cut at the base of a tread lug that wasn't sealing at all. I stuck a Dynaplug in which seemed to do the job and set off again. Pressure held longer that before but the tyre was still deflating. I stopped and looked to see sealant down near the rim which would bubble when the tyre was prodded. It was the other half of a snakebite with the hole I'd plugged earlier. I've found plugging these holes my the rim to be hit and miss in the past, but reluctant to put a tube in decided that an old-school anchovy might work, using the smallest screwdriver on a Leatherman to push it into place. Fingers-crossed, I warily pushed on.

I stopped at Grizedale for an early lunch. The club were meeting for an MTB ride there that morning and I wondered if I might bump into them, perhaps dawdling a bit too long in the hope I would. I set off again, briefly stopping to borrow the track pump at Biketreks and lust after the Pivot bikes they had on demo, before climbing up and over to Coniston and onto Walna Scar Road, the proper first climb of the route ascending to 600 meters or so. As is so often the case in The Lakes the weather had changed quickly and clouds had dropped. Above about 400 meters it was proper claggy and without the views to inspire it was tough going. Where you'd perhaps logically drop down to Seathwaite the route instead heads south. This 'this is the wrong way' feeling is a perhaps theme of the Lakeland 200: You know where you're heading at any point, but you don't seem to be going in the right direction to get there. This 'needless' out and back got me to Seathwaite via a good few bogs and I stopped at the pub for a lemonade, some crisps, and picked up a couple of flapjacks too. There were bikes parked up outside which belonged to three guys also doing the route but with a more laid back itinerary, looking to do the route over at least 4 days and enjoying a pint and a proper meal.

I came round Harter Fell into Eskdale, noting the iconic 'IFKYK' red phone box at the foot of Hardknott Pass and being pleased I wasn't heading that way today, then started a slow boggy slog over towards Wastwater and Wasdale Head. It dawned on me around the tarn just how quiet everywhere had been today I'd barely seen a soul on the trails or fells all day and right here right now I felt miles from anywhere and anyone. Bliss!

I stopped at Wasdale Head Inn to have something to eat. Conscious of time I grabbed a couple of bags of nuts, washed them down with another pint of lemonade and pushed on into the fading light. I came to regret this all too hasty stop and should really have ordered some proper food. The clag closed in as I hike-a-biked over Black Sail pass. I've never done this section before on foot or with bike and as it got dark things got a little sketchy. The GPS route didn't always seem to follow a trod, and the rocky climb was tricky enough to lug a laden bike up, and then borderline scary coming down, not helped by a front brake that had all but given up the ghost. I could pull the lever right to the bar with little braking affect and trying to brake with the rear while hike-a-bikeing would result in it locking up and skidding round past me. Seeing the lights of the youth hostel emerge from the gloom was massively reassuring. Although there was nobody about it provided a momentary safe haven to collect my thoughts. It was only 9:30pm but with no moonlight and clag barely 50 meters above me I made the call to wait before tackling Scarth Gap Pass. As mentioned, I'd not done this before and fear of the unknown had got to me.




